lucene/SpanQueries.md, before:

# Bug in ordered SpanNearQuery 

Matching for ordered `SpanNearQuery` in Lucene is only guaranteed
to be accurate if the length of each subSpans is fixed for a
given document. There are many common use cases that do not meet
this condition, and thus result in the skipping of legitimate
matches (positions and documents). 

The problem is well summarized and diagnosed in Christoph Goller's
comment for the relevant Lucene Jira issue, [LUCENE-7398](https://issues.apache.org/jira/browse/LUCENE-7398#comment-15466888).

This document provides a high-level overview of the approach
used to implement a candidate fix for this bug.

## Lazy matching will not work
As Goller correctly points out in the comment linked above, lazy
iteration (moving `subSpans` forward only, without the ability to 
backtrack) is incapable of guaranteeing accuracy.

The starting point for this bugfix candidate was to wrap each `subSpans`
in a backtracking-capable `Spans` implementation. In place of the
`int nextStartPosition()` method, callers interact with the wrapper
through an interface
`int nextMatch(int hardMinStart, int softMinStart, int startCeiling, int minEnd)`,
which abstracts all the information necessary to determine when
positions must be stored for possible future backtracking, and
when they may be discarded:
  * `hardMinStart`: forever discard spans with start < this parameter
  * `softMinStart`: skip (for purpose of returning `nextMatch`, but do not discard) spans with start < this parameter
  * `startCeiling`: disregard (for purpose of returning `nextMatch`, but do not discard) spans with start >= this parameter
  * `minEnd`: when non-negative, defines a minimum threshold for span `endPosition`s. `Spans` with `endPosition` < this value should be discarded forever.

To provide effcient navigation and resetting of stored spans (for
backtracking) the `nextMatch()` wrapper is backed by a `PositionDeque` --
storage consisting of a sorted linked deque, implemented as a
circular buffer over a dynamically resizable backing array (which,
being sorted, supports O(log n) random-access seek; the deque is sorted
as a natural consequence of being populated serially by input from backing
`Spans` iteration that conforms to the specified ordering for `Spans`
iteration). Support for mid-deque `Node` removal can lead the deque to
become sparse; so to enable efficient iteration over the deque (as well
as random-access seek), nodes in each deque are also doubly-linked
(`LinkedArrayList` uses a similar approach).

## Build matches across adjacent phrase positions
Storage nodes in the `PositionDeque` (referred to hereafter as `Node`s)
serve a dual purpose. They store information about stored/buffered positions
and previous/subsequent `Node`s for a given backing `Spans` at their associated
`PositionDeque`'s phrase index, but they *also* store references to "reachable"
(within slop constraints) `Node`s in the `PositionDeque` of previous and
subsequent phrase indexes, and to "reachable" `Node`s in the `PositionDeque`
of the *last* phrase index.

These references are used to build a "lattice" of `Node`s consisting of (at
any point in time): an ordered list of valid `Node`s at a given phrase position,
a directed acyclic graph of valid paths from phrase start to phrase end,
and a directed acyclic graph of valid paths from phrase end to phrase start.

The lattice is built by using the `nextMatch()` wrapper to drive a
depth-first search to discover (and build/cache) edges in the dynamic
graph represented by valid `Node`s at a point in time. The graph is "dynamic"
in the sense that subsequent calls to `nextMatch()` can invalidate
extant `Node`s, requiring special handling (e.g., removing or updating
graph edges).

To form links/edges between `Node`s, this approach requires *many* simple
linking nodes (similar to those required to "link" a linked list). To avoid
excessive GC that might accompany such a scale of object creation, `Node`s
are pooled and reused per-`PositionDeque` (and thus, per phrase
index); simple linking nodes are also pooled per-`PositionDeque`, and
are returned to the pool upon release/reuse of their currently associated `Node`.

## New types of information in the Lucene index
This development exposed new possiblities that make certain additional
indexed information extremely useful at query-time. As proof-of-concept
all have been implemented using `Payload`s.

### We can do something useful with `positionLength` now!
Currently, absent a query implementation that can do something useful
with `positionLength`, Lucene simply ignores the `PositionLengthAttribute`
at index time and implicitly assumes a `positionLength` of `1` for all
index terms at query time. (See brief discussion under [LUCENE-4312](https://issues.apache.org/jira/browse/LUCENE-4312#comment-13437824))

Now that we have a query implementation that respects `positionLength`,
we can take the advice in the second comment on [LUCENE-4312](https://issues.apache.org/jira/browse/LUCENE-4312#comment-13437827),
and write it to the `Payload`. This is done using the `PositionLengthOrderTokenFilterFactory`,
which in addition to simply storing the positionLength in the `Payload`,
must reorder tokens to conform to the ordering prescribed by the `Spans`
specification. (Recall that there would previously have been no point to
such reordering of tokens, since `PositionLengthAttribute` was ignored
anyway at index time). In addition to VInt-encoded `positionLength`,
`PositionLengthOrderTokenFilterFactory` records a "magic" prefix in the
`Payload` to prevent confusion among fields that use `Payload` differently.
(The proof-of-concept implementation of indexed `positionLength`, etc.,
thus cannot be leveraged in conjunction with other uses of `Payload`s,
but existing uses of `Payload` not in conjunction with
`PositionLengthOrderTokenFilter` is supported).

### Index lookahead (don't buffer positions if you don't have to!)
In order to perform exhaustive matching, we must progress through all possible
valid matches for a given `subSpan`, buffering as we go. But with atomic
`TermSpans` in stock Lucene (and consequently for higher-level `Spans` --
e.g., Or, Near, etc.), lazy iteration means that the only way to
know whether we've seen all relevant positions is to iterate *past*
all relevant positions, to the first *irrelevant* position. This has
the nasty consequence that we are *always* forced to buffer *every*
relevant position. 

To handle this case and prevent unnecessary buffering, as a proof-of-concept
we record per-term `startPosition`-lookahead directly in the index, leveraging
`Payload`s. For ease of adoption and backward compatibility, this is triggered
by the presence of a "magic" value that may be placed in the `Payload`
by the `PositionLengthOrderTokenFilterFactory`.

Spans may now determine at query-time a floor for the value that would be
returned by the next call to `nextStartPosition()`, and prevent progressing
beyond the last relevant match. Each `Node` thus begins its life as a
"provisional" `Node`, which initially represents an unbuffered layer over
the backing `Spans`. As a result, in many common cases (e.g., no-slop phrase
searching of simple terms), buffering of position data may be entirely avoided.

### `subSpans` `positionLength` edge cases, new matches exposed
In some cases, a new match possibility may be exposed by a decrease in the
`endPosition` of a `subSpans`, or by a decrease in slop caused by an increase
in the match length of a `subSpans`. In order to determine when it's worth
checking for these cases at the atomic `TermSpans` level, it would be helpful to
know the following at query time for a given Term in a given Doc:
1. Does the `endPosition` ever decrease? (this could happen in the event of
   increased `startPosition` and decreased `positionLength`)
2. What is the maximum `positionLength` for an instance of this Term in this Doc?

To make this information available at query time, we will at index time
allocate 4 bytes in the `Payload` of the first instance of a Term in each
Doc. When the doc is finished processing, as part of flushing the doc, the
maximum `positionLength` for each term is written to the allocated space;
`endPosition`s are tracked, and if we have seen a decrease in `endPosition` for
a term in this doc, the value written will be `(-maxPositionLength) - 1`.
This information may be parsed and exposed by the atomic `TermSpans`
implementation at query time.

### shingle-based pre-filtering of `ConjunctionSpans`

For accuracy and consistency, we would like to use true graph queries
for *all* phrase searching. Keeping in mind that `DismaxQueryParser` boosts
scores by running phrase searches over the `pf` fields for *all* user queries
(not only for explicit phrase queries), it would be desirable for graph
`SpanNearQuery` performance to be on par with performance of the extant default
`PhraseQuery` implementation.

This is particularly challenging for queries consisting mainly of common terms,
especially because stop words are incompatible with `SpanNearQuery` without
significant sacrifices in functionality
(see [documentation for ComplexPhraseQParser](https://lucene.apache.org/solr/guide/6_6/other-parsers.html#OtherParsers-Stopwords)).

`CommonGramsFilter` provides a possible solution, but only by sacrificing a
considerable amount of flexibility (consider that with stopword `the`, we might
reasonably want `"the caterpillar"~2` to match `the very hungry caterpillar`).

To address this challenge, we have implemented an index-time
`ShingleFilterUpdateRequestProcessor`, which behaves similar to the
`CommonGramsFilter`, but instead of emitting shingle tokens inline on the source
token stream, it buffers shingles (of configurable slop limit for a configurable
list of stopwords) as it evaluates the entire source token stream, then writes
these unique shingles to a *separate* field that indexes term frequency, but
*not* positions. We then hijack the destination field's `TermFrequency` attribute
(which, after all, is just a positive integer) to record (for each unique
shingle/token) the minimum slop (between shingle components) <= the configured
slop limit.

At query time, a corresponding filter on the `ExtendedDismaxQParser` examines
the parsed graph query for `SpanNearQuery`s containing shingled stopwords, and
constructs `TwoPhaseIterator`s for the shingles. These `TwoPhaseIterator`s are
passed as pre-filters (respecting configured phrase slop) into the `ConjunctionSpans`
`approximation` for the associated `SpanNearQuery`, significantly reducing the
overhead of setting up `Spans` for each document in the intersection of query terms.

For our use cases, this approach has resulted in `SpanNearQuery` performance
nearly identical to extant `PhraseQuery` performance, and we are now running
full graph queries in production for every user query. (Incidentally, this approach
of shingle-based filtering should also be applicable (in modified form) to other
ordered slop-dependent queries (such as `PhraseQuery`).

Commit message:

LUCENE-7398-3: mostly improvements to greedy performance
Squashed commit of the following (master 702c979429..7097d4195f):

commit c54057fd6148ba03b93e2642d291f31bcf92920b
Author: Michael Gibney <michael@michaelgibney.net>
Date:   Mon Sep 10 16:29:47 2018 -0400

    port changes from solrplugins 2ff23b6b94f488db765d114a86a20e35f74018df

commit 9de147b82a72f409192b42857cd0c81895fc60e5
Author: Michael Gibney <michael@michaelgibney.net>
Date:   Thu Aug 9 16:33:47 2018 -0400

    document some details about experience with object pooling performance

(cherry picked from commit 77976e40f106a891dfd84be087f3f3d417b3bed6)

lucene/SpanQueries.md, after:

# Bug in ordered SpanNearQuery 

Matching for ordered `SpanNearQuery` in Lucene is only guaranteed
to be accurate if the length of each subSpans is fixed for a
given document. There are many common use cases that do not meet
this condition, and thus result in the skipping of legitimate
matches (positions and documents). 

The problem is well summarized and diagnosed in Christoph Goller's
comment for the relevant Lucene Jira issue, [LUCENE-7398](https://issues.apache.org/jira/browse/LUCENE-7398#comment-15466888).

This document provides a high-level overview of the approach
used to implement a candidate fix for this bug.

## Lazy matching will not work
As Goller correctly points out in the comment linked above, lazy
iteration (moving `subSpans` forward only, without the ability to 
backtrack) is incapable of guaranteeing accuracy.

The starting point for this bugfix candidate was to wrap each `subSpans`
in a backtracking-capable `Spans` implementation. In place of the
`int nextStartPosition()` method, callers interact with the wrapper
through an interface
`int nextMatch(int hardMinStart, int softMinStart, int startCeiling, int minEnd)`,
which abstracts all the information necessary to determine when
positions must be stored for possible future backtracking, and
when they may be discarded:
  * `hardMinStart`: forever discard spans with start < this parameter
  * `softMinStart`: skip (for purpose of returning `nextMatch`, but do not discard) spans with start < this parameter
  * `startCeiling`: disregard (for purpose of returning `nextMatch`, but do not discard) spans with start >= this parameter
  * `minEnd`: when non-negative, defines a minimum threshold for span `endPosition`s. `Spans` with `endPosition` < this value should be discarded forever.

To provide effcient navigation and resetting of stored spans (for
backtracking) the `nextMatch()` wrapper is backed by a `PositionDeque` --
storage consisting of a sorted linked deque, implemented as a
circular buffer over a dynamically resizable backing array (which,
being sorted, supports O(log n) random-access seek; the deque is sorted
as a natural consequence of being populated serially by input from backing
`Spans` iteration that conforms to the specified ordering for `Spans`
iteration). Support for mid-deque `Node` removal can lead the deque to
become sparse; so to enable efficient iteration over the deque (as well
as random-access seek), nodes in each deque are also doubly-linked
(`LinkedArrayList` uses a similar approach).

## Build matches across adjacent phrase positions
Storage nodes in the `PositionDeque` (referred to hereafter as `Node`s)
serve a dual purpose. They store information about stored/buffered positions
and previous/subsequent `Node`s for a given backing `Spans` at their associated
`PositionDeque`'s phrase index, but they *also* store references to "reachable"
(within slop constraints) `Node`s in the `PositionDeque` of previous and
subsequent phrase indexes, and to "reachable" `Node`s in the `PositionDeque`
of the *last* phrase index.

These references are used to build a "lattice" of `Node`s consisting of (at
any point in time): an ordered list of valid `Node`s at a given phrase position,
a directed acyclic graph of valid paths from phrase start to phrase end,
and a directed acyclic graph of valid paths from phrase end to phrase start.

The lattice is built by using the `nextMatch()` wrapper to drive a
depth-first search to discover (and build/cache) edges in the dynamic
graph represented by valid `Node`s at a point in time. The graph is "dynamic"
in the sense that subsequent calls to `nextMatch()` can invalidate
extant `Node`s, requiring special handling (e.g., removing or updating
graph edges).

To form links/edges between `Node`s, this approach requires *many* simple
linking nodes (similar to those required to "link" a linked list). To avoid
excessive GC that might accompany such a scale of object creation, `Node`s
are pooled and reused per-`PositionDeque` (and thus, per phrase
index); simple linking nodes are also pooled per-`PositionDeque`, and
are returned to the pool upon release/reuse of their currently associated `Node`.
On a moderate-sized production index, experience has shown that this object
pooling approach leads to consistent performance. With object pooling disabled
over the same index, hundreds of millions of objects were being created per
request, and query response time was anywhere from 2x to 10x worse than with
object pooling enabled. (The highly variable response time is in keeping with
the intermittent nature of long GC-related pauses).

## New types of information in the Lucene index
This development exposed new possiblities that make certain additional
indexed information extremely useful at query-time. As proof-of-concept
all have been implemented using `Payload`s.

### We can do something useful with `positionLength` now!
Currently, absent a query implementation that can do something useful
with `positionLength`, Lucene simply ignores the `PositionLengthAttribute`
at index time and implicitly assumes a `positionLength` of `1` for all
index terms at query time. (See brief discussion under [LUCENE-4312](https://issues.apache.org/jira/browse/LUCENE-4312#comment-13437824))

Now that we have a query implementation that respects `positionLength`,
we can take the advice in the second comment on [LUCENE-4312](https://issues.apache.org/jira/browse/LUCENE-4312#comment-13437827),
and write it to the `Payload`. This is done using the `PositionLengthOrderTokenFilterFactory`,
which in addition to simply storing the positionLength in the `Payload`,
must reorder tokens to conform to the ordering prescribed by the `Spans`
specification. (Recall that there would previously have been no point to
such reordering of tokens, since `PositionLengthAttribute` was ignored
anyway at index time). In addition to VInt-encoded `positionLength`,
`PositionLengthOrderTokenFilterFactory` records a "magic" prefix in the
`Payload` to prevent confusion among fields that use `Payload` differently.
(The proof-of-concept implementation of indexed `positionLength`, etc.,
thus cannot be leveraged in conjunction with other uses of `Payload`s,
but existing uses of `Payload` not in conjunction with
`PositionLengthOrderTokenFilter` is supported).

### Index lookahead (don't buffer positions if you don't have to!)
In order to perform exhaustive matching, we must progress through all possible
valid matches for a given `subSpan`, buffering as we go. But with atomic
`TermSpans` in stock Lucene (and consequently for higher-level `Spans` --
e.g., Or, Near, etc.), lazy iteration means that the only way to
know whether we've seen all relevant positions is to iterate *past*
all relevant positions, to the first *irrelevant* position. This has
the nasty consequence that we are *always* forced to buffer *every*
relevant position. 

To handle this case and prevent unnecessary buffering, as a proof-of-concept
we record per-term `startPosition`-lookahead directly in the index, leveraging
`Payload`s. For ease of adoption and backward compatibility, this is triggered
by the presence of a "magic" value that may be placed in the `Payload`
by the `PositionLengthOrderTokenFilterFactory`.

Spans may now determine at query-time a floor for the value that would be
returned by the next call to `nextStartPosition()`, and prevent progressing
beyond the last relevant match. Each `Node` thus begins its life as a
"provisional" `Node`, which initially represents an unbuffered layer over
the backing `Spans`. As a result, in many common cases (e.g., no-slop phrase
searching of simple terms), buffering of position data may be entirely avoided.

### `subSpans` `positionLength` edge cases, new matches exposed
In some cases, a new match possibility may be exposed by a decrease in the
`endPosition` of a `subSpans`, or by a decrease in slop caused by an increase
in the match length of a `subSpans`. In order to determine when it's worth
checking for these cases at the atomic `TermSpans` level, it would be helpful to
know the following at query time for a given Term in a given Doc:
1. Does the `endPosition` ever decrease? (this could happen in the event of
   increased `startPosition` and decreased `positionLength`)
2. What is the maximum `positionLength` for an instance of this Term in this Doc?

To make this information available at query time, we will at index time
allocate 4 bytes in the `Payload` of the first instance of a Term in each
Doc. When the doc is finished processing, as part of flushing the doc, the
maximum `positionLength` for each term is written to the allocated space;
`endPosition`s are tracked, and if we have seen a decrease in `endPosition` for
a term in this doc, the value written will be `(-maxPositionLength) - 1`.
This information may be parsed and exposed by the atomic `TermSpans`
implementation at query time.

### shingle-based pre-filtering of `ConjunctionSpans`

For accuracy and consistency, we would like to use true graph queries
for *all* phrase searching. Keeping in mind that `DismaxQueryParser` boosts
scores by running phrase searches over the `pf` fields for *all* user queries
(not only for explicit phrase queries), it would be desirable for graph
`SpanNearQuery` performance to be on par with performance of the extant default
`PhraseQuery` implementation.

This is particularly challenging for queries consisting mainly of common terms,
especially because stop words are incompatible with `SpanNearQuery` without
significant sacrifices in functionality
(see [documentation for ComplexPhraseQParser](https://lucene.apache.org/solr/guide/6_6/other-parsers.html#OtherParsers-Stopwords)).

`CommonGramsFilter` provides a possible solution, but only by sacrificing a
considerable amount of flexibility (consider that with stopword `the`, we might
reasonably want `"the caterpillar"~2` to match `the very hungry caterpillar`).

To address this challenge, we have implemented an index-time
`ShingleFilterUpdateRequestProcessor`, which behaves similar to the
`CommonGramsFilter`, but instead of emitting shingle tokens inline on the source
token stream, it buffers shingles (of configurable slop limit for a configurable
list of stopwords) as it evaluates the entire source token stream, then writes
these unique shingles to a *separate* field that indexes term frequency, but
*not* positions. We then hijack the destination field's `TermFrequency` attribute
(which, after all, is just a positive integer) to record (for each unique
shingle/token) the minimum slop (between shingle components) <= the configured
slop limit.

At query time, a corresponding filter on the `ExtendedDismaxQParser` examines
the parsed graph query for `SpanNearQuery`s containing shingled stopwords, and
constructs `TwoPhaseIterator`s for the shingles. These `TwoPhaseIterator`s are
passed as pre-filters (respecting configured phrase slop) into the `ConjunctionSpans`
`approximation` for the associated `SpanNearQuery`, significantly reducing the
overhead of setting up `Spans` for each document in the intersection of query terms.

For our use cases, this approach has resulted in `SpanNearQuery` performance
nearly identical to extant `PhraseQuery` performance, and we are now running
full graph queries in production for every user query. (Incidentally, this approach
of shingle-based filtering should also be applicable (in modified form) to other
ordered slop-dependent queries (such as `PhraseQuery`).
